---
layout: post
title:  "A functional scripting interface to an object oriented C++ library"
date:   2023-08-20 06:00:01 +0100
categories: Software
---
## Introduction

Large amounts of code for applications in science and engineering are written using the object-oriented (OO) programming paradigm. As a best practice example, CERN's data analysis tool ROOT is written in C++. To interact with this framework, the user can write scripts in C++. But because C++ is a complicated language with a steep learning curve, CERN also provides ROOT bindings for Python, which is a very popular language much easier to learn. However, Python is a language originally designed to replace shell scripts, used for day to day system administration. Python has not been designed to express scientific ideas.

A much more suitable way to express scientific ideas in computer programs is provided by the functional programming paradigm, as demonstrated in the SICM [1] and FDG [2] books of MIT press as well as in the paper “The role of programming in the formulation of ideas” [3]. These seminal works are coded in MIT Scheme, a dialect of Lisp. Unfortunately, MIT Scheme does not have a large ecosystem and also is hard to install on MS-Windows systems. A Lisp dialect that has a larger ecosystem is Clojure. It runs on the Java virtual machine (JVM) which is a household name in the IT industry. However, the JVM has not gained traction in the natural sciences; the reason might be that (although open source) it is maintained by the giants of IT-industry. Also, the JVM is a very memory consuming runtime environment not well suited for running small scripts.

A recent ongoing attempt to circumvent the JVM aims at implementing the Clojure dialect on ROOT’s C++ interpreter cling [4]. A successful completion of this project, called jank, would open up the expressiveness of Lisp to ROOT users. One problem to solve on the way is how to implement an idiomatic Lisp-C++ interoperation. Looking at Clojure for the JVM, this is done via so called type hints directly written into the Clojure code, obstructing the expressive syntax.

Here we present a different approach. We propose to store the type hints in a separate data file and check for them at runtime. In this way, the LISP-C++ interoperation is not visible in the syntax which thus keeps its expressiveness. This does not affect the possibility to compile the Lisp code to a small executable binary.

The article is structured as follows: first we take a publicly available Python tutorial and translate it to Lisp. The first part of this nine line script does not involve ROOT, its translation is merely meant to demonstrate the principles underlying the functional paradigm.

The second part of the tutorial indeed involves ROOT and here we explain and develop our Lisp-C++ interoperation method.

Finally, we put the approach shown for a simple example from the ROOT tutorial into a broader perspective.

## The Tutorial

The ROOT library [5], a software maintained by CERN, the European centre for particle research, has been used for data analysis since well before the turn of the millennium [6]. This article frequently refers to a specific tutorial script [7] which CERN provides as an introduction to the library. This publicly available example, which is reproduced here, shows how to plot a simple graph with ROOT in nine lines of Python.

```
import ROOT

class Linear:
    def __call__(self, arr, par):
        return par[0] + arr[0]*par[1]

# create a linear function with offset 5, and pitch 2
l = Linear()
f = ROOT.TF1('pyf2', l, -1., 1., 2)
f.SetParameters(5., 2.)

# plot the function
c = ROOT.TCanvas()
f.Draw()
```

An integral part of our discussion is the translation and comparison of this Python code to Clojure [8], a dialect of the Lisp family of languages currently used mainly for commercial web applications [9].

Despite both being multi-paradigm languages, Python and Clojure nevertheless represent two different paradigms in software design: "object oriented" and "functional" respectively. The purpose of our translation is to further advance and demonstrate the usage of functional programming in the natural sciences.

## Header

While the CERN tutorial to plot the graph of a straight line is written in Python, the ROOT library is programmed in C++, the major systems programming language known for its compact executable binaries. The necessary interoperation between the scripting language and the library is done via PyROOT, an “automatic, run-time, Python-C++ bindings generator” [10].

In order to make PyROOT available within a users' script, its main module needs to be imported, which accordingly is done in the first statement of the tutorial code.

```
import ROOT
```

PyROOT operates behind the scenes as subsequent Python code is interpreted and executed. This operation of PyROOT at runtime is a very flexible way to solve all problems stemming from the fundamental difference between Python and C++: Python is dynamically typed whereas C++ is statically typed. With PyROOT, the types of the Python variables are determined at runtime and C++ code is generated on the fly to be then processed by ROOT's C++ interpreter "cling".

## Header translation

With Lisp, as opposed to the Python case, we do not use a runtime bridge software or cling to access ROOT. Instead, Lisp code is compiled (or converted) to C++ code ahead of its execution time. Lisp, being also a dynamically typed language, thus demands as well some strategy for dispatching to C++ code according to runtime types. A prototype for a mechanism to dispatch into pre-compiled C++ code is built up during the course of this article.

For compilation we use Ferret, a free software Lisp implementation supporting a subset of Clojure designed to generate executable binaries for "systems with as little as 2KB of RAM" [11].

C++ libraries like ROOT provide standard header files for linking their functionality to other software. Using a basic Ferret command, such a header file is imported, providing access to ROOT.

```
(native-header "ROOT.h")
```

The import statement sizes the executable binary to 500KB. Also, it already shows the ubiquitous way of starting a statement in Lisp, namely with an open bracket `(`.

The second line of our translation takes in the Lisp file `cxx.clj`, which (based on Ferret's interop features) provides higher level access to C++ libraries.

```
(require '[cxx :as ROO])
```

The code for the interop functionality, some 400 lines of self contained Ferret code, is made available free and open source [12].

## Defining the function to be plotted

The mathematical function that is plotted in the tutorial is very simple. It can be represented by the usual formula for a straight line.

f<sub>d, k</sub>(x) = d + k * x

With that definition, given that we insert the parameters d = 5 and k = 2 into the formula, at point x = 0.5 the function `f` has the value 6.

There is one complication though: the function used in the tutorial does not simply take the argument x and the two parameters d and k as three numbers. Instead, the actual function takes two arguments, both being vectors. The first vector is only of one dimension and carries x, the second argument vector being of two dimensions carrying d and k.

As a result of this complication, the textbook notation for the function results in a more complicated formula.

f: R<sup>1</sup> X R<sup>2</sup> -> R; ((x), (d, k)) -> d + k * x.

Following the example above, if called with vectors ( 0.5 ) and ( 5 , 2 ), the function `f` gives the value 6. As shown below, this formula for the function `f` can readily be taken over into LISP notation.

## Python implementation of the function
The Python code to implement this function looks quite different from its textbook notation. This is because it involves the definition of a so called class, which in this case is named `Linear`.

```
class Linear:
    def __call__(self, arr, par):
        return par[0] + arr[0]*par[1]

l = Linear()
```

Classes are the bedrock of object oriented (OO) programming which is a very versatile software paradigm. We only impressionistically depict its workings in the following single paragraph.

In OO programming, one usually does not work with classes directly, but with instances of classes. Following this pattern, an instance of the class "Linear" is created, the object named "l". This instance, through the reserved name "\_\_call\_\_" in its class definition, can act as a function. Thus "l" effectively represents our function for a straight line.

We do not go further into the details of OO programming. We rather try to shed light on the subject by carefully explaining a translation of the Python code into a functional syntax.

## Lisp implementation of the function

The Lisp code to implement the function representing a straight line looks comparatively similar to its textbook notation.

```
(defn Linear []
  (fn [[x] [d k]]
    (+ d (* x k))))

(def l (Linear))
```

The most disturbing element in any Lisp code is probably the prefix notation which carries the math symbols in the "wrong" place. Specifically, we need to write `(+ d (* x k))` instead of the usual `d + k * x`.

For further acquaintance with this unfamiliar syntax, we give two additional simple examples. First, in order to define an unnamed function taking as arguments two numbers and returning their sum, we need to write `(fn [a b] (+ a b))`. Second, to define a named function that takes no arguments and (when called) returns the number 42, we need to write `(defn name [] 42)`.

In our translated Lisp code, `Linear` is such a named function that takes no arguments. It does not return a number though, instead it returns an unnamed function.

To return this unnamed function, `Linear` needs to be called. The syntax for calling `Linear` is not `Linear()` but `(Linear)`, keeping the Lisp tradition of starting with an open bracket. By calling `Linear` in this way, we bind the resulting unnamed function to the name `l`.

So again like in the Python code, `l` is our desired function representing a straight line.

The unnamed function which `Linear` returns has the signature `[[x] [d k]]`. This means that this function  expects two arguments A and B, both being vectors, with A = `[x]` and B = `[d k]` denoting that the elements `x` and `d, k` are extracted out of the vectors already within the signature.

We just explained the two major building blocks of functional programming. For connection to the literature, we give the technical terms of those two building blocks just explained: `Linear` is termed a "higher order function", because it does not return a number but a "Lambda".

With these explanations, the Python code of the CERN tutorial can be regarded in a new way: the given Python example can be seen as functional in disguise because the class in the tutorial effectively plays the role of a higher order function.

## Setting up the canvas for drawing

Before generating plots, an instance of ROOT's `TCanvas` class is created to register a canvas object in the internal state of the ROOT system.

```
c = ROOT.TCanvas()
```


The observant reader might have noticed that this creation of the object named `c` appears earlier than in the original Python code. Thus computer memory is allocated earlier than necessary, resources that other programs might have better use for. The chosen tradeoff will be justified later.

The Lisp code for creating the canvas looks similar to the Python code.

```
(def c (ROO/T new TCanvas))
```

Like in Python, also a variable named `c` is created. Technically it is not an object (Ferret does not have those) but a two valued list containing the string "TCanvas" and a C++ pointer.

There is one additional element: the keyword `new`. The reason is that Lisp is converted to C++ using one main interop macro, Roo-slash-T. This means that during the conversion process, the name `ROO/T` completely disappears because it is replaced by the generated C++ code. This disappearing property is the reason why `ROO/T` is not termed function but "macro" instead. In contrast, `new` (and of course ROOT's `TCanvas`) does not disappear but transfers over to C++ code.

## Plotting the function
The reader might remember that when stating the textbook notation for a mathematical function, we used the letter `f` for the function's name while in the computer code the letter `l` is used. The reason is that the colloquial name `f` has been reserved for the final ROOT object, an instance of some class `TF1`.

```
f = ROOT.TF1('pyf2', l, -1., 1., 2)
f.SetParameters(5., 2.)
f.Draw()
```

The creation process for the ROOT object `f` might be pictured as follows: our formula `l` from before is swallowed up and digested into an object `f` that finally represents the straight line eventually to be plotted.

But before being plotted, the object `f` is mutated using `SetParameters`: as a kind of an afterthought, we set the parameters d and k of the already digested formula to the numbers 5 and 2 respectively.

In the final statement of the code, containing the command `Draw`, the graph is plotted. Note that the statement, like all three statements for plotting, starts with the one letter variable `f`. This starting with a variable is idiomatic in the OO paradigm which consequently insists that `Draw` is not to be termed a function but a "method of the class TF1". As before, we do not elaborate this but explain further details by moving on to the functional paradigm.

A one-to-one translation of the three Python plot statements to Lisp looks awful because it contains nested expressions.

```
(def f ((ROO/T new TF1) "pyf2" l -1. 1. 2))
((ROO/T SetParameters TF1) f 5. 2.)
((ROO/T Draw TF1) f)
```

We can improve the notation of this nested structure by binding names to those inner expressions that start with the `ROO/T` macro. Because of the way this macro is constructed, all expressions starting with `ROO/T` result in an unnamed function, so the names to be bound are going to represent functions.

While `ROO/T` results in a function, everything that is within a `ROO/T` expression is just a string that is handed down to C++, so is the string `Draw`.  But the result of a `ROO/T` expression, a function, can be bound to any name and thus just as well to the name `Draw`.

```
(def Draw (ROO/T Draw TF1))
```

With this binding, `Draw` becomes a valid Lisp function. By adding in the same manner two respective bindings for `SetParameters` and `new TF1`, and thus doubling the number of statements from three to six, we achieve the desired improved notation for plotting the graph.

```
(def f (newTF1 "pyf2" l -1. 1. 2))
(SetParameters f 5. 2.)
(Draw f)
```

The doubling of statements induced by the three bindings seems worse than is actually the case. This is because all the introduced bindings, just like the one for `Draw`, are completely generic, i.e. they are independent of the particular plotting problem at hand. Thus they could be isolated from the user's code by separating them into an extra Lisp file. Taking this generic property of the bindings further, one could imagine that such an extra source file is written up front, either by the user, another engineer or even, as made plausible below, by an automated process.

## From statements to top level expressions

We move on to provide a further improved notation for the above three plot statements by combining them into one single expression.

```
(doto (newTF1 "pyf2" l -1. 1. 2)
  (SetParameters 5. 2.)
  Draw)
```

To perform the combination we used a standard way of handling objects in Clojure, the command `doto`.

The three-to-one combination was only possible because all of the three plot statements pertained to the variable `f`. This explains the reason for the above decision to create the canvas object early: to give way to the necessary continuity for idiomatic statement-combination.

The combination just demonstrated represents the typical process in Lisp programming: at first lots of statements are created, they usually look awful but constitute working code. In a next step, facilitated by the fact that there are only functions on data, sub-expressions are extracted and statements are regrouped. Some of the resulting expressions are moved to separate files, others may span several lines. To introduce a new term: because of this multi-line spanning, Lisp code is not said to consist of statements but of "top level expressions".

The disadvantage of this combining process is that computer memory is in general not used as efficiently as possible because one loses the fine tuning ability that comes with spreading individual statements around different code blocks. The advantage is that by merely following idiomatic coding guidelines, the code for one and the same logical idea tends to gather in one place.

## Runtime checks and dispatches

The Lisp function which is bound to the name `Draw` takes only one single argument, the variable `f`. But ROOT's C++ library function Draw, supporting e.g. plotting of dotted graphs, can take additional arguments. To hand down those optional arguments to ROOT, we need to help the interop macro `ROO/T` with its C++ code-generation.

This help comes in the form of creating a type hint named `:my-hint`, this hint stating that the Draw method of class TF1 has a variant that takes an additional argument of type `string`.

```
(ROO/Ts [:TF1 :Draw :my-hint]
        [:string])
```

By calling `ROO/T` with `:my-hint`, any graph can be dotted point by point, the value of the respective argument for ROOT being the letter "P".

```
((ROO/T Draw TF1 :my-hint) f "P")
```

In general, the macro `ROO/T` always needs a hint to generate C++ code, we just did not up to now encounter them because the interop system loads appropriate default settings.

The high level Lisp-C++ interop software additionally provides an important sophistication of this type-hint concept: runtime value validation. The following more sophisticated hint does not only contain the information that ROOT's Draw accepts an additional argument of type string, but that at runtime we want this option to have the name "style" and that its runtime value always only contains one letter.

```
(ROO/Ts [:TF1 :Draw :your-hint]
        [:string]
        [[:style ::one-letter]])
```

This form of hint goes beyond the specification of mere data types facilitating the generation of C++ code. Because it specifies names and value ranges, it is the specification of a data "Schema".

The specification of such a runtime checked data Schema has the following far reaching consequence: if the data at runtime does not match the Schema, not ROOT is called but a mismatch code is returned. This allows the creation of a Lisp function which, in case of a runtime mismatch, resorts to a fallback.

```
(defn fallbackDraw [f params]
  (when (:mismatch ((ROO/T Draw TF1 :your-hint) f params))
    ((ROO/T Draw TF1) f)))
```

To plot the dotted graph, we do as expected: we call the just created fallback-enabled function by its name, resulting in the execution of the according ROOT C++ code.

```
(fallbackDraw f {:style "P"})
```

While in all cases up to now, calling a specific function always resulted in the execution of the same C++ code, now calling the same name twice can result in the execution of different parts of pre-compiled C++ code. For example, when we draw not a dotted but a continuous graph by calling the function again with different arguments, a different portion of compiled code is executed.

```
(fallbackDraw f {:style "unknown"})
```

At first glance, the fallback function just presented looks very innocent, but in fact it represents the blueprint for a Lisp "multimethod" function that provides access to all of ROOT's Draw capabilities without the need of user provided Schema hints. Instead of relying on user information, the function tries out a specific data Schema before dispatching to the according C++ code. To fully grasp its blueprint quality, it is important to realise that the number of Schemas and checks within a function is not fixed but programmers choice, the same holding for optional arguments.

## Schema in a file

The interop system presented here is a generic tool intended to access arbitrary C++ libraries. As explained, to expose a library to Lisp in the presented high level style, there need to be Schemas for every class and method that the library makes public. However, Schemas are not part of the codebase of the interop system.

As shown above, one way to add a specific Schema is to declare it within the user's code. This user code declaration is akin to the way the Python-to-C compiler Cython [13] provides access to external libraries. But while in Cython code for declaring an external function resembles a normal function declaration, within ROO/T, such a declaration is made via a data structure. More specifically, the Schemas `:my-hint` and `:your-hint` above are representations of Malli [14] data structures. Malli is a standard tool in Clojure for data Schema definition, the abundant colons, like e.g. for the type :string, are idiomatic for Malli.

The Malli data structure for a Schema is used twice: once during compile time to generate C++ code and once during runtime to validate the data and possibly dispatch to different parts of the pre-compiled code. Representing the type information as a data structure guarantees the necessary easy access to the Schemas during runtime.

This "Schema as Data" approach naturally lends itself to storing Schema declarations in an external text file. Indeed, the default Schemas for `ROO/T` are stored in a separate machine- as well as human-readable text file called "malli_types.edn". It is also possible, within the user's code, to name a Schema `:default` (instead of e.g. `:my-hint`). However, the above succinct translation of the Python tutorial to Lisp was only possible with the pre-declared defaults being in the "malli_types.edn" file.

With some library being covered by such a Malli structure, its methods and classes can be readily accessed, but in general it is necessary to provide, within the user code, hints that refer to the respective pre-defined Schemas. But as shown in the fallback example, when additional suitable Lisp multimethod functions are provided, a user wanting to access some particular library function does not have to specify any type hints at all.

## Conclusion & Outlook

We presented a way to access ROOT via the Lisp dialect Clojure. For this, Lisp was compiled to C++ using the Ferret compiler. The type hints necessary for C++ code generation were stored in a separate file. For seamless interoperation without obstructing the Lisp syntax, the use of "multimethods" was demonstrated. Those perform runtime checks on the input data and automatically dispatch to the respective pre-compiled C++ code. The type hints are stored as a Malli data structure to ensure compatibility with the larger Clojure ecosystem.

The interop system presented here is a generic tool intended to access arbitrary C++ libraries, which are widely used in science, engineering, and quantitative finance. Given that all necessary information about classes and methods is contained in the machine readable Malli text file, it is conceivable to create multimethods automatically. Also, considering that C++ header files contain machine readable class specifications, even the automatic generation of the Malli file itself does not look completely out of range.

## References
[1] https://mitpress.mit.edu/9780262028967/structure-and-interpretation-of-classical-mechanics/  
[2] https://mitpress.mit.edu/9780262019347/functional-differential-geometry/  
[3] http://hdl.handle.net/1721.1/6707  
[4] https://jank-lang.org  
[5] https://github.com/root-project/root/#cite  
[6] https://cds.cern.ch/record/687164  
[7] https://root.cern/manual/python/#passing-python-callables-to-c  
[8] https://www.clojure.org  
[9] https://de.surveymonkey.com/stories/SM-f2XkbSKiS_2BDdJShL141pOQ_3D_3D/  
[10] https://cppyy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/  
[11] https://ferret-lang.org  
[12] https://github.com/kloimhardt/LisRoot  
[13] https://cython.readthedocs.io/en/latest/src/tutorial/external.html#external-declarations  
[14] https://github.com/metosin/malli  
