---
layout: post
title:  "Free Randomness"
date:   2025-12-01 06:00:01 +0100
categories: Physik
---
Physics has three important postulates:

(1) The speed of light is invariant  
(2) Quantum randomness is pure  
(3) Quantum states live outside 3d-space  

My opinion is that, however a new theory might look like, the above three will remain as they are accepted now. So says my magic looking glass.

Those postulates are based on empirical evidence in the laboratory. Especially in randomness postulate (2), a.k.a. the Born-rule, the "pure" assumption is based on the painstaking exclusion of many conceivable alternatives.

Out of those postulates follows the theorem that there is no signal faster than light. No tachyons allowed. This is because from the constant-speed postulate (1) it follows that tachyons can be used to send data into the past. And sending into the past violates the "pure" in postulate (2).

At least that is how I interpret "pure" in randomness: without possible past explanation, in principle unpredictable, in no case exists a beforehand explanation within the state of the universe.

The constant-speed postulate (1) was accepted by 1920. The randomness postulate (2) took form after 1930. Did people in the 1920th think that tachyon signalling faster than light was possible? I guess not. Why? Because they chose to believe in free will. Only with pure determinism there are no contradictions arising from the possibility to send signals into the past. Anything better than determinism in the roaring 20s, certainly the impossibility of faster than light phoning was acceptable.

Einstein did not believe in free will. But because of his insistence on locality, he did not believe in supraluminal signalling either. In 1916 he introduced random spontaneous emission. I make the preposterous claim that Einstein introduced the dice in physics to save locality.

To explain non-local entanglement, postulate (3) is necessary. Exactly because it proposes an entity that lives outside 3d-space, this postulate cannot be tested directly in the laboratory. Einstein did not like this spooky stuff, but to this day no alternative to postulate (3) has been found to explain laboratory-observed entanglement.

Now I'd like to make a move Einstein would not have liked either: add free-will to the postulate mix and remove the original meaning of "pure". Because if we decide to not only allow laboratory reports but also allow as evidence the consistent reports about inner states of human beings, we very well can postulate fundamental free will.

The assumption of a free will for certain states attached to human beings is based on painstaking exclusions of many conceivable alternatives. The additional assumption of "fundamental", i.e. that will-carrying states live outside of 3d-space (and thus humans), is a daring  extension of spooky postulate (3).

However, the postulate of fundamental free-will can be used to explain the "pure" behaviour of observed randomness. The painstaking search for alternatives to the "pure" in postulate (2) can in this light be seen as a fundamental search of free will to find itself.

So, I do not know if I have free will. Nor do I worship free will. I am well aware that Hegel saw the villain Napoleon as personified Weltgeist. But I want an explanation for Child-Mozart's autograph score. Or deBroglie's search for his wave-length.

## Appendix

The postulate of fundamental free-will is certainly daring. For some it may be preposterous as a part of physics because it adds an esoteric  flavour into the mix.

The current mainstream of scientific method is indeed more down to earth. I'd like to sketch it on the example of the Helium atom.

One starts with the classical theory. Two bodies ("electrons") orbiting a center of attraction, whether the force being either gravity or electrostatics does not change the math.

Then one inspects the spectrum of light emitted by Helium and realises that this spectrum does not match the classical calculation. A new idea is needed. A new postulate.

To get to the new postulate, one recognises that to produce the spectrum of Helium, we were using two parts: first the light-emitting gas of Helium itself and second a glass prism to produce, out of this light, the spectrum.

The new postulate now is this: whatever the new theory explaining the Helium will be, this new theory will also explain the run-of-the-mill behaviour of the prism (the "Apparatus").

We know that the Apparatus keeps working like any other object, being it an O-ring of our vacuum chamber, the handbook describing it or the cat strolling unter the library table. Quantum mechanics makes the postulate that the run-of-the-mill behaviour of the Apparatus can (with enough computer power) be explained.

And indeed, this is a very sensible postulate, as past empirical facts do not change when a new theory appears. Maybe we get a better explanation, but the run-of-the-mill observations remains the same. This is the necessary firm ground to discuss a shaky new theory.

We bought this firm ground by first recognising that not only the Helium but also the glass lens is an integral part of the problem. And by demanding a calculation only for the Helium but not the lens, we introduce a cut between those two integral parts.

We postulate that the future involved computation for the Apparatus will indeed explain its run-of-the-mill behaviour, and that with the crucial addition that the new theory can do only approximately so. There are always error bars in any calculation as well as observation. We will forever be content with explaining the lens only approximately, for now using the classical theory, feeling like Christmas+Easter when eventually getting a half as good approximation from the new theory. For the lens, we do not need more and we do not hope for more.

Now that we have this sorted out, we draw our attention to the Helium. The procedure is to take the classical calculation for the Helium and apply to it a mathematical transformation to improve it. We "quantise the theory". To do so, the colours emitted by the lens need to be interpreted as energies. In this way, the lens sets the stage for the quantisation transformation to be the energy-coordinate system. There are other experiments, other setups, which demand the use of other coordinate systems in such mathematical transformation, the impulse-coordinates being the most prominent ones. This shows again that the Apparatus is an integral part of any quantum problem.

In this described way, we can explain the observed spectrum of our system Helium+lens. This works so well that we sometimes forget about all theses stages and speak only of the Helium. In chemistry this makes a lot of sense, indeed this attitude only makes further communication about molecules feasible in the first pace.

But also O-rings consist of atoms. And so we try to move the so called Heisenberg cut, the one which is so clear in spectroscopy and chemistry. We do many body quantum mechanics for which, and that is the bad news, we do not have a clear solution. State of the art is density operator theory.

But there is no doubt that, for an O-ring, the end result will be classical physics. If we will get there by current methods remains an open question. Until then we need to formulate this end result as a postulate. The mainstream is down to earth and sensible: Classical physics is a postulate of quantum mechanics.
